=========
Rationale
=========

Why open source?
================

The problem with closed systems
-------------------------------

It's necessary for any IT system, particularly one with a long intended
life-span, that it should be adaptable to future and changing needs, and able
to keep pace with technological developments. If it isn't, it will soon become
obsolete.

If developing, maintaining and adapting a system can only be achieved by its
supplier, then its users are locked in - beholden - to the supplier.

This lock-in may matter less for wealthy users, but for those with fewer
resources, such a future burden is hard to bear. Even if the system is a
generous gift, it's a gift with a cost.

The world's least wealthy nations can least afford to invest in, or even accept
gifts of, IT systems and infrastructure projects that lock them in.

Open source options provide a way for them to own and develop their own systems
and projects, and to take charge of off-the-shelf systems that they adopt, or
become participants in the wider communities that maintain them.

The problem with closed languages, architectures and environments...
--------------------------------------------------------------------

The tools with which and the environments in which systems are created also
matter. A closed platform can be used to develop an open source system, but its
owners will still remain locked-in to the tools and the platform, and tied to
their future.

Open source environments, languages and development frameworks make total
ownership of software possible.

Cost and sustainability
=======================

The comparatively low cost of open source systems lowers the bar to acquisition
and participation.

If a developing nation is to develop the skillset required to create and
maintain software that meets its own needs, it will need to educate and train
its own software developers, equipping schools and universities with systems it
can afford and can afford to maintain in the future.

Open source systems make it possible to create a virtuous circle of sustainable
investment.

Why Python?
===========

Python is a modern general-purpose language, used throughout the world in
everything from embedded systems to large-scale infrastructures. Python is free
open source software.

Python has its roots in education, and was conceived in part as a language for
computer science teaching. These roots manifest themselves in the way it
emphasises simplicity and clarity, making it a particularly easy language to
learn and being using productively.

As well as being favoured in education, Python's connections with education
have helped build around it a valuable ecosystem and culture that support new
learners of the language.

The worldwide Python community
------------------------------

Again partly through its roots in education, the Python culture and community
are very welcoming of new learners, and informed by a genuine ethos of
friendliness and mutual support. This ethos is exemplified in the behaviour of
the worldwide Python community, for example in the very strong `codes of
conduct that are adopted by PyCons
<https://github.com/python/pycon-code-of-conduct/blob/master/code_of_condu
ct.md>`_, and the tenor of online communication within it.

The Python community's spirit of generosity and its concerted engagement with
questions of diversity within IT help make Python an especially appropriate
choice for a conference of the kind proposed.
